My name is Lachlan Sinclair and I am a Software Engineering Student graduating from the University
of Technology Sydney in November 2025. I was drawn to this opportunity by your company’s
innovative engineering projects and commitment to furthering positive social and environmental
causes which aligns well with my passion for using engineering as a tool for positive impact.
Commitment to ethical conduct and the highest standards of professional accountability
During my Internship at Optik Consultancy I led a project with a team of six engineers from varying
disciplines. Over time it became apparent that one of the members in my team was struggling with
technical aspects of the project. Despite the fact we were still on track to finish the project and were
successful it was important to address the situation out of professional accountability as the leader
of the team. Rather than ignoring the issue I proactively sought to understand his strengths and
passions such as his experience in business. I then pivoted his responsibilities to leverage these
strengths including helping to develop pitches and analysing our app from a usability and business
value perspective. This strategy allowed for a member who was previously uninterested in the
project to be able to contribute in a meaningful way and productive way, while my actions
demonstrated a strong professional accountability for the productivity and satisfaction of my entire
team.
Demonstrated ability to effectively communicate both with other engineers and with stakeholders
from different fields
While serving as a software consultant during and following my internship with our client Dryflow
Magnetics, it was at first difficult to manage the technical knowledge gap when discussing a complex
software project with stakeholders with limited experience. My task was to find a way to effectively
bridge this communication gap with my team of Software and Data Engineers with the non-technical
client to ensure a product that satisfies their requirements and expectations whilst managing the
limitations and challenges presented technically. I managed this during discourse through email and
meetings with our clients by explaining the complex technical processes of our project in a simpler
and digestible format highlighting the most important details for them such as progress, challenges
and success criteria. Additionally I listened actively to the client’s business needs and translated their
feedback and requests into actionable items for the team. This clear communication resulted in a
successful project that was both fulfilling for my team and myself whilst also meeting the needs of
the client.
The ability to engage with a creative, innovative and proactive environment
While serving as a programming teacher for young students in schools across New South Wales it
was important to make sure that class was appealing to the young students. I would spend my
personal time leading up to lessons planning engaging ways to frame the course work in contexts
that would resonate with the demographic. This included teaching concepts in an interactive
environment with verbal participation and questions for the students, providing fun challenges that
would encourage them to take the concepts from today’s lesson and challenge their creative and
logical thinking skills. This resulted in the lessons being enjoyable for the students and maintaining a
full attendance rate throughout the program despite being extra-curricular whilst also helping young
students learn about engineering and programming.
Demonstrated ability to use and manage information
For my Engineering Capstone project I completed a Software and Data project to assess machine
learning and AI tools ability in the identification and management of cybersecurity threats for
electrical grid systems. I was required to manage and evaluate the role of thousands of features
across tens of thousands of rows of data. I utilised common data science python libraries such as
pandas and numpy to systematically clean and filter the dataset handling the thousands of
simulation events and anomalous data points. I then used a large selection of machine learning
algorithms and AI tools to create categorization models for the electrical grids status. My methodical
approach to this project demonstrated an ability to use and manage large sets of information and my
results concluding the viability of machine learning tools in successfully predicting the grid status
demonstrated my success in this.
The ability to manage your own performance in a professional environment
Following my internship at Optik I continued as a software consultant for my client company Dryflow
Magnetics. Previously I was working in a more controlled environment with a team to help hold me
accountable as well as leadership but since the conclusion of the internship I have been responsible
for working alone on the project. To maintain accountability and effective management of my work
and progress on the project I adopted a very detailed reporting system where I would at the start of
each week outline my intent and targets for that week with detailed success criteria and risk
assessments. And then at the end of the week a summary report detailing how my progress has
measured against my estimations and indepth breakdown of how my time had been spent and
reports on feedback and meetings with the client. These tools helped me to manage and assess my
own performance within a professional environment despite having more limited interaction and
oversight from others.
A demonstrated ability to work as part of a team and to show leadership when required
At the beginning of my internship the project groups were prompted to volunteer a leader for the
project. Initially nobody volunteered for this, but as it was required and I wished to be able to get the
most from this experience I stepped up into the position. At first this was quite challenging because I
had no prior experience in a leading role and wasn’t sure on how to effectively manage and motivate
a team so different to myself. But overtime through both my own research, time spent bonding with
and understanding my team and leadership workshops organised through the internship I was
afforded the opportunity to develop and improve my leadership skills. A key moment was realising
the importance of reviewing the productivity of the team regularly, identifying what doesn’t work
and making changes to the processes and operation of the team to improve our output and
satisfaction. Making these changes and working constantly to create systems that were personalized
and worked the best for our team allowed us to all have a very positive experience during the
internship and served as a good demonstration of my ability to work in a team and display leadership
when required.
I look forward to further discussing my qualifications and enthusiasm for this position in an interview
and have attached my resume.
Regards,
Lachlan Sinclair